A transfixing chord of melancholy runs through Wes Anderson’s latest film, a curt, chipper European caper called The Grand Budapest Hotel. Set in roughly four time periods , this rueful comedy wears its Andersonian shabbiness like an old mink stole. It’s wistfulness as decoration, lending Anderson’s gaudy rooms a whisper of something deeper, a mournful sense of the Old World being really, well, old. I only wish Anderson had made this wintry, bittersweet feeling the centerpiece of his film.
Anderson has built a meticulous world full of spirited quirks and loving details that play like an homage to something he himself invented. The Grand Budapest Hotel’s European whimsy feels familiar in parts, but I can't quite place all the references. Whatever his outside influences, Anderson assembles and fuses them together so thoroughly that it’s as if he were trademarking them with his own imaginative stamp. What we’re seeing has the homeyness of a familiar place, but still bubbles over with unique surprise.
One big surprise in this film is how violent it is. The 1930s section of the film deals with the onset of a WWII-ish conflict, and that “-ish” is a problem. All the cutesiness in the world can’t really make what was beginning to happen in 1930s Europe remotely charming, as Anderson seems to want to do. Here he could have seized a rare opportunity to deepen his gaze, to take the film beyond his typical bemused remoteness. But instead he gives us a few bloody fingers and then bounces along.
It’s perhaps a strange comparison to make, but Grand Budapest Hotel left me with the same feeling I had after Django Unchained, both films in which wildly talented auteurs walk up to a serious historical era, only to skitter away from its most harrowing implications. To me, The Grand Budapest Hotel, for all its delightful tics and peculiarities, is finally the film that had me screaming for Wes Anderson to say something. Anything, really. Instead, he made a chase movie.
It’s a sprightly cast (though, as always in Anderson’s films, it could use a few more women) and the story whips and whirls along engagingly. But it all feels … without a point. By now it’s not all that novel to see a bunch of great actors speaking in Anderson’s vernacular, moving brusquely around in his little dioramas. Despite its starry cast and gorgeous aesthetics, The Grand Budapest Hotel ultimately feels disappointingly insubstantial.
Which brings me back to that chord of melancholy. It’s so enchanting, so intoxicating, that it’s really easy to forget that it only fills the air at the very beginning and very end of the film. In some ways, these tiny dollops of graceful sadness, are a cheat, a device to bring us into and take us out of the movie feeling like we’ve experienced something we really haven’t. There’s so much potential dwelling in the cozy, quaintly mysterious corners of Zubrowka, but Anderson whisks us by them. I love the nostalgic Europe that Anderson has built here. I just wish he wanted to stay and look around a while.

