The game but losing battle waged by Old World grace and refinement against 20th century totalitarian thuggery is sympathetically portrayed by Wes Anderson via both arch and sophisticated farce in The Grand Budapest Hotel. With an attention to design detail that now has perhaps morphed from a preoccupation into a mania, this is as densely aestheticized an experience as has come from a quasi-mainstream American filmmaker in many a moon. In a very appealing if outre way, its sensibility and concerns are very much those of an earlier, more elegant era, meaning that the film’s deepest intentions will fly far over the heads of most modern filmgoers. The Bottom Line An idiosyncratic period comedy that will delight connoisseurs more than the wide public. But while the society may be high, the comedy is low, the talk vulgar.
From the first moment, there’s no mistaking who made this film. Constant lateral tracks, push-ins, whip-pans, camera moves timed to dialogue, title cards, chapter headings, miniatures, use of stop-action, fetishization of clothing and props, absurdist predicaments — all the techniques Anderson has honed over the years — are used to pinpoint effect here. He even changes aspect ratio depending upon the era in which the action takes place; widescreen for 1968, the boxy 1.37:1 format for the 1930s and 1.85:1 for the later action. The effect is lively and expressive.
The semi-absurdist competition for loot is festooned with baggage both personal and political while being played out in madcap style that involves Gustave’s pursuit by a military police captain furtive train travel, imprisonment, an escape led by a bald, tattooed convict, an appeal to the nuttily preposterous Society of the Crossed Keys, a secret organization of top European concierges, and a crazy and delightfully unreal high-speed ski chase.
Accompanying Gustave through all the zany mayhem is young Zero Moustafa (Tony Revolori), who is ostensibly undergoing his apprenticeship as a trainee lobby boy during this tumultuous period. A refugee from somewhere in the Middle East, Zero proves himself a quick learner, a resourceful partner and worthy protege for Gustave and, ironically, a non-European who, better than anyone else in the later years, embodies the old values in a so-called classless (and unclassy) new world that considers them best forgotten.
Anderson’s style can as easily be praised for being formal, rigorous and precise as it can be criticized for seeming artificial, fastidious and fussy; especially here, applied to a tale set in Ruritanian Europe of 80 years ago rather than the United States, his approach may well seem off-putting and weird to the general public. But more discerning viewers will perhaps respond to the underlying air of melancholy and regret for the passing of a time marked by certain social niceties, subtler sophistication in relations between the sexes and an appreciation for the art of living.
