Title: [CRITICS. A repentant ‘Oppenheimer ’, a subversive ‘Barbie ’ and more room premieres]
Authors: [Burstein, Sergio]
Source/Date: [07/20/2023]
URL: [https://www.latimes.com/espanol/entretenimiento/articulo/2023-07-20/criticas-un-oppenheimer-arrepentido-una-barbie-subversiva-y-mas-estrenos-en-salas]
Keywords:  [film, military, Nolan, war, biopic]
Total Word Count: [684]
Brief Summary: [The LA Times review of Oppenheimer highlights the film as visually entertaining and an intellectually intense portrayal of Robert Oppenheimer. The film explore's Oppenheimer's legacy annd moral strugle. Cillian Murphy delivers an excellent performance, and the film is lauded as bold and a great cinematic experience.]


When I was a child and still living in Peru, one of the real stories that impressed me the most was the launch by the United States of two atomic bombs in just three days and in the midst of densely populated Japanese cities. The number of deaths, which some sources place above 200,000, and the fact that most of the victims were civilians, seemed to me to be absolutely devastating without any justification.

What had happened to those directly responsible for what for me were unheard of massacres? I wondered. Were they able to sleep peacefully after these acts? I had some kind of response when I found out about the case of Claude Eatherly, a pilot linked to the attack mission who was consumed by guilt and whose mental health progressively deteriorated over the years. But he was not really familiar with J. Robert Oppenheimer, the American physicist who has been called “the father of the atomic bomb ” and who, after what happened in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, became a staunch defender of nuclear and arms control, as I read now.

“Oppenheimer ”, Christopher Nolan's film already on the bill, tries to remedy the lack of knowledge about this transcendental character using a particularly ambitious proposal that constantly refuses the opinions of the conventional ‘biopic ’ to transform itself into an epic reconstruction of the scientist's experiences linked both to the Manhattan Project -in charge of building the bomb- as to the later vicissitudes of his life, marked by the questions that were made to him due to his initial sympathies for communism.

The result is certainly impressive and laudable, and it is for various reasons. The first belongs to the strictly cinematographic field, and has to do with the fact that the film was filmed using a combination of IMAX and 65mm that gives it a very particular greatness, in addition to looking magnificently on an IMAX screen (that is, the way in which I saw it). But that should not lead us to think that “Oppenheimer ” is simply a visual spectacle; in fact, most of his scenes take place in closed environments and focus on the faces of his characters.

This is also a tape that has to be seen by the way it questions the military decisions of the superpowers and the way in which they can affect humanity as a whole. Nolan, who also wrote the script, continues to put on the table the arguments that pointed to the need for an unprecedented attack in order to end a conflict (World War II) that had already claimed millions of victims; but images showing American citizens celebrating the cruel bombardment with a crash say more than a thousand words.

Despite this, one of the least successful aspects of the film is its excess of words. Nolan does an admirable job of simply transmitting some complex concepts of quantum physics to us, and the first part of the story, marked by the air of ‘thriller ’, is absolutely captivating.
