Title: [From Superhero to Villain: Robert Downey Jr.’s ‘Oppenheimer’ Turn Was Undeniable]
Authors: [Nayman, Adam]
Source/Date: [02/28/2024]
URL: [https://www.theringer.com/2024/02/28/oscars/robert-downey-jr-oppenheimer-oscars-best-supporting-actor]
Keywords:  [Downey, character, man, Nolan, film]
Total Word Count: [2100]
Brief Summary: [The Ringer's review of Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer highlights the film as a character study merging blockbuster scale with moral complexity. Lead Cillian Murphy delivers a magnetic performance supported by a stellar cast.]



After spending a decade-plus confined to the Iron Man suit and the Marvel playground, the man behind Lewis Strauss reminded everyone what he’s capable of: a nervy performance full of pettiness, desperation, and force

“I played a guy named Tony in the MCU for about 12 years,” said Robert Downey Jr. earlier this month at the BAFTAS, where he was accepting the Best Supporting Actor award for his performance in Oppenheimer. “Recently, that dude Chris Nolan suggested I attempt an understated approach as a last-ditch effort to perhaps resurrect my dwindling credibility.”

“That dude” is pure Downey, threading affection through satire like barbed wire: If there’s one filmmaker who doesn’t seem like a dude, it’s Nolan, he of the on-set suit-and-tie directorial style, the man frequently referred to by his own children as “Reynolds Woodcock.” (This clip of Nolan not quite losing himself while watching Eminem at the 2002 MTV Awards is the stuff of legend; it deserves its own oral history.) A-list razzing of this sort doesn’t get much better. But the larger sentiment about Nolan rescuing Downey from his own success couldn’t have been more on point—and is quite frankly meaner than anything Martin Scorsese has ever said about Marvel.
Back in 2019, the same year that Tony Stark met his fate at the end of Avengers: Endgame, Downey earned cinephile brownie points for being more conciliatory than most in response to Scorsese’s remarks—an indication that, unlike some of his collaborators, he understood the larger implications at play for cinema. In an interview with Howard Stern, the actor said he welcomed a “different perspective” and issued a slightly sardonic mea culpa about his franchise’s near-monopolistic box office dominance over the past two decades. “There’s a lot to be said for how these genre movies—and I was happy to be part of the ‘problem’ if there is one—denigrated the era, the art form, of cinema,” he said. “And, by the way, when you come in like a stomping beast and you eliminate the competition in such a demonstrative way, it’s phenomenal.”

For an image of that dominance—and Downey’s central role in establishing it—think back to the astonishing scene in Iron Man when a revitalized (and now palladium-powered) Tony Stark lays waste to the terrorists who’d held him hostage, hovering over a war-torn village as an emblem of the American military-industrial complex, a wisecracking one, naturally, with benevolent intentions and perfect aim. In a moment when movies of all kinds were still channeling ambivalence in the wake of 9/11, trying to (super)heroize a guy who’s unilaterally carrying out drone strikes overseas was a tall order. But through a combination of actorly skill and the free-floating, endearing aura he’d cultivated in the aughts as a comeback kid, Downey didn’t just sell the concept: He made it impossible not to buy in. As national allegories go, the parable of a billionaire arms manufacturer who grows a (metaphorical) heart of gold hit the sweet spot between technocratic fantasy and political reality; 
