The word that will likely be used most often to describe Denis Villeneuve's "Dune: Part Two" is "massive." Expect a whole lot of variations on the words "epic" and "spectacle" too. Whatever big words you apply to the result, Villeneuve undeniably did not approach Frank Herbert's beloved sci-fi novel with modest aspirations, and it's his ambition, along with the top tier of behind-the-scenes craftspeople with whom he collaborated, that have paid off in this superior follow-up to the Oscar-winning 2021 film. While that beloved blockbuster often felt like half a film, "Dune: Part Two" locates significantly higher stakes on Arrakis, while injecting just enough humor and nuanced themes about power and fanaticism to flavor the old-fashioned storytelling. More than a simple savior or chosen one story, "Dune: Part Two" is a robust piece of filmmaking, a reminder that this kind of broad-scale blockbuster can be done with artistry and flair.

"Dune: Part Two" picks up so closely on the heels of the first film that the Fremen are still transporting the body of Jamis home again after he was bested in the fight with Paul Atreides. After the massacre of House Atreides, Paul chose to go with the Fremen, much to the consternation of his mother Jessica. Thinking both Paul and Jessica were taken by the desert and all hopped up on violence after destroying the Atreides interlopers, House Harkonnen amplifies its attack on the Fremen, leading to a few remarkably staged battles between the warriors and soldiers. Villeneuve and his team deftly fill the first hour with battle sequences that counter the firepower of the Harkonnen military and the Fremen tribal combatants, who often literally emerge from the earth to destroy them. Bodies fall from the sky as enormous ships burst into flames in a way that feels nearly operatic.

As the battle between the Fremen and the Harkonnens for control of Arrakis serves as the backdrop for "Dune: Part Two," Paul's arc from nervous young man at the beginning of the first film to potential leader plays out in the foreground. A Fremen tribal leader named Stilgar is convinced that Paul Atreides is the chosen one that has been foretold among his people for generations. Even as so much of the mythology points to Paul's savior role, the Emo King tries to blend into the Fremen, forming a relationship with a young warrior named Chani. Paul passes the tests put in front of him by the Fremen, takes on the tribal name of Muad'Dib, and vows vengeance against the Harkonnens who were behind his father's death.

While the plotting in "Part Two" is undeniably richer than the first film, its greatest assets are once again on a craft level. Greig Fraser, who won the Oscar for cinematography the first time, tops his work there with stunning use of color and light. It's in the manner the sun hits Chalamet's face at a certain angle or the wildly different palettes that differentiate the Harkonnens and the Fremen. The browns and blues of the desert culture don't feel arid as much as grounded and tactile, while the Harkonnen world is so devoid of color that it's often literally black and white. Hans Zimmer's Oscar-winning score felt a bit overdone to me in the first film, but he smartly differentiates the cultures here, finding more metallic sounds for the cold Harkonnens to balance against the heated score for the Fremen.