On Earth, human beings have evolved to enjoy a fairly comfortable place in the food chain. You have to venture far from other people to risk being eaten by an apex predator — by straying from the path on safari, say, or swimming in dark, shark-infested waters. By contrast, no one takes his safety for granted on Dune, the spice-rich desert outpost of Frank Herbert's early-'60s pulp serial, where surface-dwellers live in fear of giant sandworms that slither at great speed to gobble anything remotely edible up above.

Director Denis Villeneuve teased these monsters in his awe-inspiring if relatively episodic 2021 adaptation of "Dune." As science fiction goes, the film rewrote the rules, leading with revolutionary visuals and its equally striking sound design, to the extent that those elements took precedence over the plot: an interplanetary battle for the galaxy's rarest resource. Mind-blowing as it all felt, we hardly glimpsed the subterranean terrors: Twice, they revealed themselves just long enough for humans (and their machines) to disappear into mouths the size of sinkholes, and then later, Timothée Chalamet's spindly Paul Atreides barely outran another, turning to stare up at a maw lined with hundreds of long, sharp teeth.

The sandworms are back in "Dune: Part Two," just one of the many dramatic payoffs Villeneuve strategically withheld till the other side of a two-year intermission. Whatever you do, don't mistake this follow-up for a sequel. It's the second half of a saga, which Villeneuve has hinted about wanting to carry through a third installment, provided "Part Two" earns enough for him to keep going. Like Christopher Nolan, the director is operating on the largest possible scale, pushing the medium to accommodate his vision. Also like Nolan, he has composer Hans Zimmer's help in making everything sound as stunning as it looks.

The antagonists are easy to identify; less so the heroes in Herbert's book series, which tracks the rise of Chalamet's character — the apocryphal savior, or Kwisatz Haderach — with great skepticism. The movie asks: Is Paul the messiah or merely a self-fulfilling prophecy? Could centuries-old religious beliefs have been implanted with the express purpose of manipulating the masses? While it's satisfying to see Paul get his revenge in "Part Two," he's tormented by visions of the holy war to come and right to question his own destiny.

Like both Anakin Skywalker and his son Luke in the "Star Wars" series (which Herbert's "Dune" obviously inspired, even though George Lucas beat it to the big screen), this powerful leader is drawn to the dark side. The morality of "Dune" isn't nearly so binary, and many will miss — or else misinterpret — the deeply ambivalent tone of the movie's final minutes. What looks like triumph could well be a turn for the worse.